Part 1
Words: 95
Fiona Bruce
[00:00:00] Our first question from Tim.
AudienceMember 20210610QT01
[0:00:04] Good evening. The government is committed to 1.4 billion for the schools catchup. Are the government waiting for Marcus Rashford to step in before they sort the rest of the funding out?
 
PETER KYLE :
[00:38:00] Kevin Collins was hired by the prime minister and he would have known the direction of travel. When he came back with the report, which was very, very obvious what it was going to report for quite a long time leading up to it, it's very in line with what all the other countries similar to Britain and our committees are calling for.
 
Part 2
Words: 148
PETER GREEN
Suddenly Boris Johnson says no, Richi Sunac cuts the money. Now, for students, what I couldn't understand from all of this, last week I met a parent of a kid who, with his friends, jumped over the fence of his school so that they could get into school and do some activity over the weekend and use the facilities that they have. What does that say about Britain right now? We have students who are breaking into school because they want to be in school so much and the barrier is the government stopping them. We don't have a government which is matching the wishes that young people have for themselves right now. We have a government that has a catch phrase about levelling up. If levelling up is not about students and education. If levelling up is not about investing our people, then what is it for?
7:40
Part 3
Words: 106
[JENNI MURRAY] : I have to say I was somewhat baffled when a real expert in education, Kevin Collins, was asked to be the author to show how we could get this serious situation up and running again. He came up with what I presume was a terrific plan because he really knew what he was talking about, needed £15 billion, a lot of money, admittedly, but it was a long-term plan for kids who really, really need help. You know, there are going to be young people leaving school very shortly who have had hardly any education for their final years, which is really worrying.
7:40
Part 4
Words: 86
[JENNI MURRAY] : So then Gavin Williams says yesterday: Yes, he sort of accepted that the 15 billion would have to go down to 1.4 billion and he said, bizarrely, I found it particularly bizarre because I'm a Yorkshire woman, he said he was a Yorkshireman and he thought 1.4 billion was a lot of money. Yes, Gavin, a lot of money, but not enough.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : Lucy, Boris Johnson said education was his biggest priority. Do you think it is looking like that right now?
7:41
Part 5
Words: 115
[LUCY FRAZER] : I do. First of all I'm pleased that Tim brought up the question because I think children have had a really tough time. He is absolutely right that the government stands behind them and supports them.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : It is not standing behind its own education recovery tzar it is.
 
[LUCY FRAZER] : What that money is going towards is one-to-one tuition. So 100 million hours of one to one tuition which the evidence says will really ensure that they catch up, is going to support teachers and giving temperatures additional training, going to early years. Those are all things that Kevin Collins set out and said we ought to do.
7:41
Part 6
Words: 98
[FIONA BRUCE] : He also said you are failing a generation of schoolchildren.
 
[LUCY FRAZER] : If I explain the additional money he asked for. The additional money people have been talking about over the last 24 hours, that all relates to extra -- the additional hours for teaching for the school day. And the issue about that is it might be a brilliant idea, it could be a brilliant idea and, if delivered not right away, may well improve life chances, but the evidence isn't as clear at the moment of the evidence of the one-to-one tuition.
7:41
Part 6
Words: 98
[FIONA BRUCE] : He also said you are failing a generation of schoolchildren.
 
[LUCY FRAZER] : If I explain the additional money he asked for. The additional money people have been talking about over the last 24 hours, that all relates to extra -- the additional hours for teaching for the school day. And the issue about that is it might be a brilliant idea, it could be a brilliant idea and, if delivered not right away, may well improve life chances, but the evidence isn't as clear at the moment of the evidence of the one-to-one tuition.
7:42
Part 7
Words: 100
[PETER KYLE] : The US are spending 30 times more than Britain. You're spending 50 per child. How on Earth do you expect students to catch up with £50 over two years? I mean, it is just not going to happen.
 
[LUCY FRAZER] : I'll come back to Peter's point in a minute. If I just finish.
Fiona Bruce
[0:04:34] Briefly.
 
[LUCY FRAZER] : Briefly but an important point. The extra money is for the additional hours if we go beyond the school day. So we need to see the evidence as to whether that will improve life chances, and it may well do.
7:42
Part 8
Words: 136
[LUCY FRAZER] :
We also -- it's quite a controversial measure. We have to ensure the unions are behind it, parents are behind it, students are behind it. If they are, and if we do get that evidence, the Department of Education is reviewing that, reviewing it at the moment in time for the spending review, and the prime minister has clearly said that is not the end of the money. So we may very well be open to spending that additional money, levelling up, as Jenni said, which is absolutely important, and giving children the point they need.
Coming to Peter's point. The money that he says other countries are spending on education, we're not really comparing apples and pears. The statistics that have been bandied about over the last 24 hours, our 1.4 billion doesn't include --
7:43
Part 9
Words: 126
[FIONA BRUCE] : Hang on a minute. I must let our audience in. Statistics are coming from Kevin. He is talking about £310 per pupil, in the Netherlands it is 200.
 
[PETER KYLE] : He asked for 700 per student, you are offer 50.
 
[LUCY FRAZER] : He has done a fantastic job. But when he makes those calculations doesn't include the academy, the national Academy that the government set up. It doesn't include all the funding that we put in to the laptops. The 11.4 --
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : I'm going to let the audience in. I appreciate you are being asked a lot of questions from us on the panel but I must let the audience in as well. Colette.
7:44
Part 10
Words: 164
AudienceMember 20210610QT02
[0:06:30] Thank you. I'm quite shocked at what I'm hearing. Do we not think this generation has been failed enough? As an employer we're talking about students coming out -- you just said about coming out going to the employment market. You know, we can't fail this generation any more that's already been failed. They are going to be left with the tax bill of this and we owe it to them to put in the right amount of money. This will not fill that education gap for any schoolchildren or anybody in further education or anything else.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : Fatima?
 
[AUDIENCE MEMBER] : So the extra funding is for tutoring the children who need it the most but what about in those schools and areas where the children who need it the most are the majority of the children? How are the teachers supposed to choose which of their students they support and which they leave to fend tore themselves. There isn't enough money to support everybody.
7:44
Part 11
Words: 135
[FIONA BRUCE] : Donna, our children are precious and £50 per child is allowed are you saying. It is crazy land. If you are going to spend the money, listen to the man's advice. You're not taking it onboard. £50, honestly, it Boris Johnson spend £50 on his apartment?
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : Let me go To Heather.
 
[HEATHER MCGREGOR] : I think what was asked for was a lot more than extra hours of teaching. One of the things that Kevin Collins asked for was 100 extra hours of teaching a year for sixth formers and more funding for disadvantaged sixth formers. We in universities, and I sit here running a business in a University, are dealing with people coming inadequately prepared for coming to uni, in some cases not going to university at all.
7:45
Part 12
Words: 117
[HEATHER MCGREGOR] : As we heard from the audience, this is failing children. But I'll tell you who else it is failing, in five years' time it will be failing business because people will not be skilled for the jobs that will be needed in the post-COVID economy. And, Tim, I loved you calling out Marcus Rashford. What we need is more people that make a difference.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : Heather, what do you think of those who say it would be lovely to spend 15 billion on education but there are going to be so many demands on the public purse? This is one among many and ultimately is all going to have to be paid back one day.
7:45
Part 13
Words: 173
[HEATHER MCGREGOR] : The public purse is being used at the moment for furlough. There is still, for instance, 35,000 air crew on furlough. So what is happening is the government are temporarily propping up things in the very short term. I'm more worried about what is happening over the much longer term. The decisions that are made now will affect in 5, 10, 15 years' time. You know what, that's way outside the life of this party. You know, this is why I've never joined a political party.
 
[PETER KYLE] : The Collins review does say the scarring effect would be 100 billion out of our committee if we don't go forward. This is young people who want to do this. The young people are hungry for this. The barrier to them throwing themselves into all of this activity is the government itself. All the COVID recovery funding is already allocated. The decisions being made is how that money is being spent. They are choosing bricks. It should be children as well.
7:45
Part 14
Words: 208
[ANTHONY COSTELLO] : Children feel abandoned. They have lost their education. I think the figure is 110 days out of 190 they've had social isolation, mental health problems, they've lost their exams. Many people have lost their University experience and their vocational training. This is a disaster. James Heckman, the American economist, won his Nobel prize because he showed how each dollar or pound of investment gets a fantastic return the earlier you start, from pregnancy, early childhood development, primary schooling, secondary schooling. We spend most per head, interestingly, in this country on tertiary education rather than all the others and vocational. But that's a good thing as well. Children are our future and we need children not just to be invested in through the education system but in all policies. Because they're facing not only this pandemic, which is a kind of tea party compared to the disaster of climate change that we're going to face, and they need to have investment in all kinds of things: Play areas, transport, food systems, agriculture, environment, to reshape their lives for the future and give them an optimism to believe that they can really cope with what's going to be thrown at us from an unstable climate as well.
7:47
Part 15
Words: 183
[FIONA BRUCE] : There are quite a few hands up. Let me come back to our audience. Sam, you are the mother of five children. What's your view?
 
[AUDIENCE MEMBER] : Teachers have worked so hard over the last few months. It is disheartening to know that funding is going to be cut. My two boys now are going to be awaiting GCSE and A-level results in August. We pray that they've put enough work in, but the teachers have just been such a credit. I completely agree, you know, they've worked so hard with the kids. You know, it is so unfair that the funding is not going to be there.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : Charlie?
AudienceMember 20210610QT03
[0:12:22] Hi. I've got two daughters, one aged 20, one aged 18, second year of University, doing A-levels. The one at university, her experience has, quite frankly, been shafted. The A-level one, ditto. And we've got to a stage where, okay, sometimes that happens. Please don't let it affect other year groups. Let's do something about what we can and put money into those ones that we can actually affect and change.
7:48
Part 16
Words: 170
[AudienceMember 20210610QT03]: Second, from a political, Machiavellian point of view, this is an age group of about 6 years' gap and they are going to damn this government forever. If you want people to vote for you, you have to do something about it otherwise you have lost that age group. So, please, sort it.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : Lucy, let me come back to you. The second half of the question is are the government waiting for Marcus Rashford to step in before sorting it out? Is this a sort of policy where we are going to see a U-turn from the government?
 
[LUCY FRAZER] : The Government have said clearly they are waiting to review the evidence. That's what they should do. Because we shouldn't make policy if it's not evidence-based. So it is absolutely right we review the evidence, we see what works. The spending review. It is unusual to announce funding outside of a funding review. What the Government has done is announced 1.4 billion outside --
7:49
Part 17
Words: 158
[PETER KYLE] : That's 7 months' time. Students will be leaving school.
 
[LUCY FRAZER] : Can I just make one other point. It is really important. Because I, like you, think education is absolutely fundamentally important. It's one of the reasons I went into politics. I think it is really important we invest in young people. One of the first announcements that Boris Johnson made when he became leader of the country was to announce 14 billion pounds into education for the following three years. To level up every single primary and secondary school pupil so that we had a good baseline. That's a baseline, from which we are working. On top of that, we've just announced the 3 billion and the prime minister has said, very clearly, the door is not shut but we need to review the evidence. And the pending review will be coming up in the autumn and we will look at it then.
7:50
Part 18
Words: 185
[FIONA BRUCE] : I can see -- there's still lots of hands up, we can talk about this for some time. We have other questions. I'm going to move on to Gary Day.
 
[AUDIENCE MEMBER] : Good evening, Panel. Looking forward to the 21 June decision on COVID restrictions. Considering there were no reported deaths on Tuesday, which scientific advice should the government take?
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : I notice that there were 12 deaths today reported in the latest 24 hour period. Andy?
 
[ANTHONY COSTELLO] : On the face of things, things look much better. We had this massive surge with the Kent variety, now called the alpha variant which has killed 60 plus thousand of citizens. Cases, deaths have all come back. Vaccine procurement and rollout has been very good because of the Oxford team and most important the NHS and primary care trusts. We all want our lives and livelihoods back. But we're still in the middle of a raging global pandemic. We have always argued from independent SAGE for a suppression policy rather than a herd policy which we think doesn't work.
7:51
Part 19
Words: 208
[FIONA BRUCE] : Do you think we should lift restrictions on 21 June?
Anthony Costello
[0:16:04] No, I don't. We have the Indian variant which is now thought to be 50 to 70 percent more transmissible. Evidence comes out today that you are 2.7 times more likely to end up in hospital with this variant compared to the Kent or Alpha variant. And it has evidence of vaccine escape. If you have had one dose of the vaccine you are only 34 percent protected. If you had two doses, you're only about two-thirds protected. So that means the real figure is only 40 percent of our population has had two doses. That means there are millions and millions of people who could be infected by this virus. Now, many of them will be younger and death rates should be much, much lower but many people could end up in hospital. The NHS could be thrown into another surge. We just don't know. So what do we do? I think at the moment what we have to do is watch the data extremely carefully in the next two to three weeks. I think we must devolve power and resources to local public health teams. We haven't given the money and the contact traces that we need.
7:53
Part 20
Words: 175
Anthony Costello
We need restrictions on indoor mixing and the wearing of masks and, realistically, we have to wait until we can get two dose levels up to, ideally above O percent. Because the more transmissible a virus, the more coverage you need in order to achieve herd immunity. So things could very quickly get out of control. Let's remember, a year ago in March we had 580 reported cases on 12 March, by the end of the month there were 1.8 million.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : Heather, let me come to you. If what Anthony is suggesting does come to pass, that has huge implications for business.
 
[HEATHER MCGREGOR] : Yes, it does. But there's a big difference between being told we have to wear masks on 21 June and actually stopping things opening.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : He is talking about a restriction on indoor mixing, for example.
 
[HEATHER MCGREGOR] : There are so many -- you have to remember, I mentioned earlier how many people in the air transport industry are still on furlough.
7:54
Part 21
Words: 229
[HEATHER MCGREGOR] : Anybody involved in the business, for instance, of music festivals, or festivals of any kind, there are still so many people who are not able to fully engage in the economy, and I don't think the virus is going away. I mean, the question was what scientific advice do we listen to. To my mind, the evidence -- we should listen to all the scientific advice but we have to find a way to let business operate. And the sooner we can do that, the sooner the tax take will increase then we will have more money for things like education that I think have much bigger long term implications.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : I appreciate you are not a scientist, but do you think restrictions should carry on after 21 June or be lifted then or possibly sooner?
[HEATHER MCGREGOR] : If anything, I would like to see restrictions lifted sooner but I would like to see us work out a way to live with it on a longer term basis. We are going to be living with this virus for a very long time. What's going to happen on 21 June, there will be another date and another date. We need a permanent long-term solution. Business cannot live with this kind of knee-jerk reaction. The reaction to me is much too immediate and not really long term enough.
7:55
Part 22
Words: 216
Fiona Bruce
[0:19:50] okay. Shaun.
 
[AUDIENCE MEMBER] : I'm just thinking, you know, we are a country of around 66.5 million, you know, and I'm just -- if we keep -- you know, the gentlemen on the panel wants to consider a model of suppressing the virus. To what point? There are always going to be new variants. You know, you can't keep us locked up forever. We have to be released at some point.
 
[ANTHONY COSTELLO] : Can I just say about lockdown, if you look at the countries that have been most successful, the Asian states, they suppress the virus by proper public health control measures. They have death rates of China 3 per million, Vietnam less than 1 per million. We're at 1,900 per million deaths and we've had three lockdowns, they've had none, their economy is thriving. If you think you can live with a dangerous virus like this that will keep coming back and throwing variants at us which are more and more transmissible and more virtual, we have another thing coming. We should have invested, we should have had a test, trace and isolate programme with properly supported isolation, which we still don't have in this country. We should have had that a year ago. We're just playing the same game time and time again.
7:57
Part 23
Words: 200
Fiona Bruce
[0:21:12] Jenni.
 
[JENNI MURRAY] : I think, like the entire population, or most of the population, who are neither economists or scientists, I am completely confused. I'm 71 years old. I would really love everything to open up again. I want to be able to go inside a restaurant -- okay, it is sunny now, but when it is rainy and cold I would love to go inside a restaurant with my family and friends. Life to go back to normal. Have a good life for so long as I may have left. But I don't know. I was watching Newsnight the other night and they were discussing the 21st as it -- and one scientist, just like you, so no, no, we can't open up. We must keep this virus down. We mustn't let it spread again. And the other one said: No, it will be fine. We'll be okay. You know, we had lots of vaccinations. I'm double vaccinated and I keep getting tested regularly, but I'm still scared. I'm scared of getting it. My age group is kind of the most at-risk one and you just frighten me by saying how little protection I have with my double vaccine.
7:58
Part 24
Words: 229
[ANTHONY COSTELLO] : No, you do have protection and you are protected against dying. You are not necessarily -- we have to state the facts, and this is the government figures released today, about the transmissibility and also about the -- the additional vaccines. We have to face reality. I'm not arguing for another national lockdown. I wish we had not had lockdowns and followed a much more oppressive policy. I would be going much more for a locally-led process. So hotspots can be closed down quickly.
 
[JENNI MURRAY] : I'm sure you're right and very well informed but I'm in a position where, you know, we heard of so many lives that have been told in the last, is it 18 months, 15 months, however long it has been, we don't know who to trust.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : Let's see what our audience make of that. Andrea.
 
[AUDIENCE MEMBER] : I'm just empathising massively with Jenni. Hi, everyone. I study micro biology in university. But that was about a million years ago. My comment on the coronavirus is why are we not making some kind of plan to encourage people to conform to the guides, the rules, the regulations that are there? We know wearing a mask works. Let's make that mandatory. Let's make it an offence not to wear a mask. What's happening with that?
8:00
Part 25
Words: 246
Fiona Bruce
[0:24:02] All right. Let's hear from some other people too. Will.
 
[AUDIENCE MEMBER] : Maybe slightly unpopular, I think we should extend the deadline. We have a solution and its the vaccine. Why should we put more people at risk, 130,000-odd dead already, why put more at risk for the sake of potentially a few more weeks.
Fiona Bruce
[0:24:24] Tony.
AudienceMember 20210610QT04
[0:24:24] Good evening. I get the impression that Anthony wants to have his cake and eat it. On the one hand he is saying we should maintain a lockdown, then he says in the Far East they manage to continue to boom without a lockdown. So I'm as confused as Jenni. I thought that the vaccination programme was going really, really well. I thought we were on top of this and getting better by the day. Now we're told that, well, this is going to go on forever. At some point we've really got to regain our lives. Yes, we should have learned from what happened in Vietnam. Yes, we should have been wearing face masks much earlier, but I remember early in the lockdowns the scientists were poo-pooing masks saying this disease is transmitted by touch. So the advice just keeps changing. I wish all these people would get together, work out, learn from what others have been doing. We haven't done well but we haven't done as badly as some other countries. Let's move forward, get the population vaccinated, get out of it and move forward with sensible ideas that will allow us to regain our lives.
8:01
Part 26
Words: 169
[FIONA BRUCE] : Lucy, let me come to you. What scientific advice should the government follow? We think about June 21. You heard what Anthony said, not a proper policy on test, trace, isolate, we are playing the same game time and again.
 
[LUCY FRAZER] : The scientific advice we should follow is the data. That's what we're going to do. We're going to look at the data on how the vaccinate programme is going, what new variants we have in the country, what is the hospitalisation number and the death rate.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : What is it looking like for 21 June.
 
[LUCY FRAZER] : At the moment it is looking good, but we are going to continue to make that assessment in the coming days and up to 14 June when a decision will be made.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : When it comes to Jenni's point about different scientists offering different points of view, as members of the public, what are we all supposed to make of it.
8:02
Part 27
Words: 181
[LUCY FRAZER] : It is not just scientists that offer different points of view. Of course we need to listen to all the scientists, especially those on SAGE, and we all need to look at the data and take into account some of the things that your Panel have been saying in relation to other matters as well, impact on mental health, impact on the economy. So politicians look at the health data but then they have to look at everything in the round. Can I just answer one point that Anthony made because he compared us to other countries. And I think it is also important to look at what we've done in comparison to other countries on the vaccine. So, we're in a really strong position at the moment. We now know as of today we vaccinated 50 percent of adults. We're continuing to roll out that programme. That is one of the reasons why, if the data -- the other data is good, one of the reasons why we might be able to open up on 21 June.
8:03
Part 28
Words: 205
[FIONA BRUCE] : Peter, from a Labour perspective do you want 21 June delayed or do you want to press ahead with easing restrictions on that day?
 
[PETER KYLE] : It should be following the data, not the date. I think Anthony is right on that.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : Abbott any would like to
 
[PETER KYLE] : He is saying what he thinks the data currently says. We need to get closer to the point. It was wrong to call it freedom day and signpost it so far in advance because we should have been seeing how the data -- focus on getting that down. The Labour Party has been constructive on this. We said months ago everybody who comes into the country should be hotel-isolated so we can properly isolate and suppress the virus. Only 1 percent of them still are to this day. That's irresponsible. We said that people who are forced to isolate should be given more support. At the moment only 10 percent of people who are asked to isolate are isolating. I have real sympathy with Andrea's point. Where we get this right as a country is where the messaging is crystal clear based on scientific advice we all understand.
8:04
Part 29
Words: 187
[PETER KYLE] : Where we got it really wrong is when there's ambiguity. Remember at the beginning we were told the pubs were staying open but don't go to them. Everybody was confused. We were told to take our own advice, which wasn't good enough in a public health emergency. Right now we are being told we have amber, green and red. Make your own mind up if it is amber. We should have green and red, there shouldn't be an amber. We need absolutely crystal clarity so we can act together as a country and act together based on scientific advice we all understand and we can move forward as a country, not always being told one thing, advised another thing, then being made to feel personally responsible for it.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : Pierce, you said you were originally planning to go to Portugal. You mentioned the green list there, Peter. Portugal is now off the green list as of today.
 
[AUDIENCE MEMBER] : I just found out today. I didn't realise that until about an hour ago that Portugal is off the green list. It is very disappointing.
8:06
Part 30
Words: 234
[AUDIENCE MEMBER] : I agree with the point that we should follow the data rather than the dates, but impossible for people and businesses to figure out when we are going to be able to open up. You can't not have a day to work towards. I also think that with the amount of people that have been vaccinated with how long this has been going on, with the impact on children's mental health and on the economy in general that at some point we do need to, you know, draw some kind of line under this and say we have to accept this is another disease among all of the other diseases that we have to deal with. I am sympathetic to the view we need to unlock, we need to have our people vaccinated, which they are. We need to be clear -- I do agree with the Labour person, we need to be clear what is red and what is green. Portugal is on the amber list. I have no idea what that means for me personally. As an NHS employee, I imagine I can't travel. It would be easier if people knew what they can and can't do rather than what they may be able to do. To me we need a date. I think we need to have a balance between the economy and trying to save every single person going hospital.
8:07
Part 31
Words: 170
[AUDIENCE MEMBER] : We have to accept that, just like people, you know, a man dies of pros Tate cancer every 45 minutes in the UK, we're not up in arms about that every second of the day. We need to accept that this is going to be with us. We need to have a balance, I think, between the economy and people's lives and, you know, what we can do with our freedoms.[D
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : Pierce, you mentioned mental health. We have a question on that. Let's take that now from Ryan.
 
[AUDIENCE MEMBER] : Thank you, Fiona. My question is, as we see Naomi Osaka withdraw from the French Open, when will issues of mental health ever be seriously considered?
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : For those of you not completely across this story, the world No. 2, Naomi Osaka, she pulled out the French Open after she decided she would no longer take part in post-match press matches. She has been fined for that and threatened with sanctions as well. Jenni.
8:08
Part 32
Words: 247
[JENNI MURRAY] : I had an awful lot of sympathy for her as I often have -- I don't watch a lot of sport but I do watch athletics quite a lot. They come running off the track and they're rushing up to try to get to their parents to be congratulated and somebody is there with a microphone stuck under their noses. They can barely breathe. You just think no, no, no, leave them alone. What they are good at is what they do on the track. What she is good at is what she does on the tennis court. Sometimes you watch these interviews -- I do occasionally watch Wimbledon -- they are still puffed when they are being interviewed. They might not have played as well as they hoped they had, they are very embarrassed, and I'm bored.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : When you have someone like Billy Jean King I believe as professional athletes we have responsibility to make ourselves available to the media.
 
[JENNI MURRAY] : Martina, who I have adored for years, she said the same thing. But that means it's just business. You know, it's the sport that I want to watch. I want to watch her whack her ball with her racket and then go home and maybe at the end of the tournament, when she's won, give a nice little speech in the mitts of the court, saying how grateful she is. But don't persist them. It is horrible.
8:09
Part 33
Words: 209
Fiona Bruce
[0:33:40] Anthony.
 
[ANTHONY COSTELLO] : Anxiety, depression is the largest in the world and laterally undiagnosed. Sports people -- Naomi Osaka has said she is a shy reserved person. She is interesting because her mother is Japanese, her father -- she identifies with the Black community and has done a lot for the Black Lives Matter movement and come in for a lot of fl for that. She has always hated public speaking. She is 23 year old. Lots and lots of people watching or on the Panel will have had mental health problems or know people who have had that. We should respect that lead sports people are higher at risk of this because they are in the public eye and I think we should treat it sensitively. What you don't do is when she says "I really can't do the press conferences because of my mental health", you don't say "we're going to fine you", throw you out the tournament. It makes no sense at all. A lot of people --
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : You could argue that other players may not want to do it, particularly if they bombed a game or played badly, they may not want to do press conferences either, but they do.
8:10
Part 34
Words: 203
[ANTHONY COSTELLO] : Get the coaches on. In soccer you don't get every football player interviewed after the match. Okay, it's a team game. But we heard so much about -- we are more open about it. When you think Serena Williams, Johnny Wilkinson, Alistair Campbell, Lady Georgia, they all talk about mental health now. But if she said she injured her knee, people think nothing of it. When she says "I have a mental health problem", which is quite courageous, she should have been looked after by the sports authorities.
Fiona Bruce
[0:35:32] Hannah.
 
[AUDIENCE MEMBER] : I think the press only really have themselves to blame for the fact that sports people don't want to talk to them. They have become more and more -- looking for the angle, the scoop, the story, the headline that is going to shift their article over the others. As a result they have isolated the people they are writing about. They no longer work with the sports people. They don't consider their mental health at all. They're solely focused on what they can get out of that interview. I think it should be -- it should reflect back on them and they should be limited in their access.
8:12
Part 35
Words: 243
[FIONA BRUCE] : Steve?
 
[AUDIENCE MEMBER] : Hi, everyone. She's the world number 2. This could be new to her. So suddenly it's a problem being accosted by the press. What happened when she was world number 3 or world No. 8? It is part of the job as has been said earlier. That's what goes with the territory. Okay, if she suddenly has a problem, mental health problem, yeah, I would have every sympathy with her.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : I'll point out Naomi has said she suffered long bouts of depression since Twain. She has had a hard time coping with that. She is 23 year old. Ryan, you asked the question. What's your view?
 
[AUDIENCE MEMBER] : Thanks, Fiona. Yeah, Naomi Osaka has been incredibly brave. She is only 23, a very young lady and she has been forced to take a lot of responsibility at an early age. But I think it extends to a wider point with mental health and other issues, sexism, racism, that people say you're going through something, to share that experience and to tell people your issues and your problems. Naomi has been brave and done that but when she has done that she has been lambasted and vilified by very many people. An unnamed popular journalist in the UK has been forthright in his views about her. So I think we should have more sympathy and patience and realise she is a human being.
8:14
Part 36
Words: 204
[FIONA BRUCE] : Heather, I wanted to come to you, where does one find the balance between protecting someone's mental health, which Naomi O'Sacka feels she has not been supported in that way and the spectators, turning to the game want to hear from their heroes, what they felt of their play, whether they, you know, what we can learn from that.
 
[HEATHER MCGREGOR] : I think what the spectators want to do more than anything else is watch Naomi play tennis. That, to me, is what most spectators want and, given the choice between Naomi Osaka playing tennis, being able to watch her or her not being there at all, I personally would prefer being able to watch her play tennis. As is mentioned, she is 23. You know, the mental health problems that have arisen, I think, in this pandemic, that all the work of the resolution foundation shows that it is that group, it is that age group, the under 25 age group, that have suffered more than anybody else in this pandemic. So I'm very, very pleased that Naomi Osaka has stood up on this because it called out the whole issue on the under 25 age group.
8:14
Part 37
Words: 192
[HEATHER MCGREGOR] : Two other points. I was ready pleased that MasterCard, her big sponsor, went straight out behind her and said, you know, we back you 100 percent. Because, if anything was going to make that whole thing fall apart it was if her sponsors all turned their backs on her. The second thing I would say is I see young people all the time in my job at that stage and I think as universities we have a responsibility to people between the ages of 17 and 24 or whatever to equip them to go out into the world. It is a tough, difficult place to be and, as has already been mentioned, this is something, you know, that happens to lots of people. This is one of the most common things, anxiety, depression. I think it is important that we equip our young people. That's what I set out to do all the time, equip our young people with the skills and capabilities. Not just exam passes but to be able to deal with things. So I would just like to see her play tennis. That's what I feel as a fan.
8:15
Part 38
Words: 178
[FIONA BRUCE] : It is such a difficult issue because it is impossible not to have sympathy for Naomi Osaka, of course. But I can't imagine there's any player looks forward to that interview and you could get to the stage where --
 
[ANTHONY COSTELLO] : John McInroe did it.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : If you won. But if you lost, I can't imagine there's many.
 
[LUCY FRAZER] : There might be a difference between what people don't want to do and people having health issues doing it. Like others said, it was courageous for her to do it. It was important for her to do it. When people struggle with mental health it is really important to mention that because, you know, there shouldn't be any stigma attached.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : What do you think of the response from the grand slam tournaments. They slightly climbed down but at the beginning they threatened her with sanctions, issued a fine, said they may not be able to play in Wimbledon and other tournaments. That you think that's the approach.
8:16
Part 39
Words: 157
[LUCY FRAZER] : I'm sure they will be thinking about their reactions to that. But mental health is a big problem that we need to address. I think Heather was right to say we need to support young people in this. When I was on the Education Select Committee a number of years ago we did a report on mental health and how students were coping with it. I went to one of the schools in my constituency and I said I want you to ask me loads of questions about being an MP but do you mind if we spend the first minutes talking about mental health because I want to ask you the questions we're studying. In fact we spent the whole session on mental health because everybody wante to talk about it. So we do need to invest in schools, we need to support people in mental health and that is really, really important.
8:18
Part 40
Words: 199
Fiona Bruce
[0:41:56] Peter.
 
[PETER KYLE] : I think it is a sad conversation that we're having here. I think every profession needs to have people from different backgrounds and apparently types that is driving creativity, whether sporting or artistic, politics, public life or any other walk of life, is informed by people's backgrounds. Some people have hidden challenges, other people have seen challenges. But Naomi has a challenge which is unseen and yet everybody is expecting her in her personality to conform to everything else. Her personality type is clearly helping her creativity and sporting performance. I do not see why it's not possible for her sport and the people running her sport to make an individual decision about whether individual players can cope with being in the public eye or not. Why would we drive people out of a sporting profession because they don't have the personality type, which is an alpha personality type? In politics, it is a huge shame that introverts find politics is impossible. We miss out on people who bring a different power to the way they think and the discussions that they have because they're too scared to get involved in the real to and fro.
8:19
Part 41
Words: 145
[PETER KYLE] : So I just ask people to be kind when we have situations like this. It is a genuine human thing to do. I'm sure that the sport, like every other profession, can identify individual people based on individual discussions and informative exchanges to people who just need to quietly be let off the hook on one or two things. We can't we do that in a sport with the resources that tennis has.
Fiona Bruce
[0:43:56] Tony.
 
[AUDIENCE MEMBER] : Thank you, Fiona. I'm sure when we make these life choices and sport is one of them, surely publicity and the press comes with the territory. I feel very sorry for Naomi but she should have anticipated that people would be interested in her story. She would be interviewed. I bet, Jenni, if she had had the opportunity on the day she would have had her on women's hour.
8:19
Part 42
Words: 143
[JENNI MURRAY] : And I would have interviewed her beautifully and gently and taken great care of her mental health. When you do those kind of things day after day, but when you are in a sporting environment, you know -- I won't mention any names of people who I've --
 
[PETER KYLE] : We don't know, Tony, until you get into these positions. These people who go on to Love Island don't know what it's like to be under the spotlight. You think you know what it is like as a viewer, but when you get to the top of any profession, whether politics, sports, arts, there are lots of performers out there who can't perform live, they do it in the studio because they don't like it, they can't cope with it emotionally. Let's be a bit kinder to these people.
8:20
Part 43
Words: 163
[ANTHONY COSTELLO] : She is a black woman and she gets tremendous abuse, no doubt on social media. Women get far more abuse than men in social media and black people -- look at Diane Abbott who breaks all records for being abused on social media. How much has that contributed to her mental health state? That's why she doesn't want to do it. She's a tennis player. Let's enjoy her tennis. Talk to the coach afterwards. What's the problem.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : Another question from Phil.
 
[AUDIENCE MEMBER] : Why has the eviction ban with tenants on rent arrears finished when the full restrictions have not been lifted and people have been unable to return to work?
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : So in England the coronavirus eviction ban came to an end on Monday. We have been talking about 21 June but we don't know if restrictions will be fully lifted then or not. Why has it? Why has this eviction ban finished?
8:22
Part 44
Words: 196
[LUCY FRAZER] : We protected tenants for a long time and it is important we did that because we didn't want anyone to be thrown out of their houses during this period.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : Why have you lifted it now?
 
[LUCY FRAZER] : It is also important that landlords can take control where it is necessary to do so. And there will be a period of time, of course, where tenants will be able to settle themselves but we are coming out of a lockdown. There's been a large number of measures put in place. But, you know, hopefully we are at the end of that period and we talked about it before and we hopefully will be moving back on to normal life.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : Peter?
 
[PETER KYLE] : I think that response illustrates the entire lack of empathy people have. For people who are not home-owners and who are renting, struggling to get by, the sheer insecurity of people are being plunged into -- the only reason there's a transmission period is because people are going to be in court. There should be a longer period of time before this kicks in.
8:23
Part 45
Words: 162
[PETER KYLE] : I understand and I have huge sympathy for landlords who are overwhelmingly decent people who are trying to support the people who are tenants to them, but there should be some form of compensation that can ease the transition in. People who have lost their jobs need to have time so they can readjust to the new economy coming out of -- rather than plunging them into this insecurity. Rough sleeping is going to go through the roof. There's going to be a huge turn in communities as pep are kicked out of their homes inment.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : Do you agree with shelter that no fault evictimisation should be band.
 
Peter Kyle
[0:48:00] Yes. I do.
 
[AUDIENCE MEMBER] : Thank you, Fiona. I think tenants need a lot of support, but I believe that landlords, if you had your own house and you're supplying a tenant with a -- a lot of landlords have problems trying to get their property and do what they want with it.
8:23
Part 46
Words: 145
[AUDIENCE MEMBER] : A landlord should have the right to use his property and let whoever he wants in there to rent. However, I do think the government should come up with an incentive scheme to pay landlords who support poor tenants or people who struggle with their rent, that the government steps in and actually helps the landlord and encourages them to try to keep the tenant going. Also, I do think the tenants should have that wee bit more support as well until we get well and truly out of this COVID pandemic.
 
[AUDIENCE MEMBER] : Whilst I have every sympathy with landlords, the ending of the eviction ban is premature. Michael Gove said he doesn't rule out an extension to furlough. That means more people losing their jobs or not earning as much, not able to pay their rent. So now is not the time.
8:24
Part 47
Words: 139
[FIONA BRUCE] : Is now the time, Heather?
 
[HEATHER MCGREGOR] : Just a point of clarification. There hasn't been a ban on evictions. Evictions have been possible throughout the pandemic; it is the length of notice period that has been given. What has changed this week in England only --
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : Hang on. Evictions -- I'm sorry, evictions were not being enforced unless in very particular circumstances, which effectively was a ban. Do you think the time has come to lift that ban now?
 
[HEATHER MCGREGOR] : I do. In order to have a properly functioning rental sector. Can I say why we need a properly functioning rental sector. It is because house prices have gone up so much now that it is almost impossible for anybody to get on the housing ladder in an early stage.
8:25
Part 48
Words: 155
[HEATHER MCGREGOR] : Most people are going to be living in rental accommodation. There's twice as many people living in rentals now than four years ago, four times as many as 20 years ago. We need a functioning rental sector. Just like one of the people in the audience mentioned, if we do not get the ability to evict tenants, people won't put their houses up for rent. That's what will happen. Then we'll have loads and loads of empty rental stock. That to me is a much bigger problem. What the government has done -- all the governments because this is a devolved matter -- is put measures in place. So even now, even from 1 June, in England, you have to give four months' notice. So it is -- there are measures in place that take the pandemic into account. But we must have normality because we must have a flourish I didn't work rental sector.
8:26
Part 49
Words: 119
[FIONA BRUCE] : Phil, you asked the question. I could see you shaking your head.
 
[AUDIENCE MEMBER] : It came back earlier. The conservative there mentioned, well, things will get back to normal. Well, people are still on furlough, people still aren't back in work. So when they're back to normal, fine then look at this, the way the rent is paid, whatever. Don't say we're doing it now because things eventually will get back to normal. It is being done too early. People are worried now about being evicted. They're worried about losing their job and the next thing they're going to be worried about is whether they are going to lose their house as well.
8:27
Part 50
Words: 128
[FIONA BRUCE] : Anthony.
 
[ANTHONY COSTELLO] : Well, eviction is a disaster for families and for children. I was astonished to find that 90,000 children in London live in temporary accommodation. And the effects that will have on their families, on their education, and the rest. So in the short term we need long notice periods, debt renegotiation, and interest-free loans. I agree with Heather about keeping a rental sector going. But I think in the medium term we need architects and builders to be coming up with much more low cost, affordable housing, maybe using newer pre-fabricated technologies which build quickly, which are low carbon, which are environmentally friendly. I think we can solve this problem alongside progressive policies to ensure that people don't lose their homes.
8:27
Part 51
Words: 139
Fiona Bruce
[0:52:40] Jenni.
 
[JENNI MURRAY] : I think people underestimate the amount of poverty this pandemic has caused. I live in a quite well-off part of London and I'm okay. You know, I own my own house. We have a food bank that is absolutely flooded out with people who simply cannot afford to buy food for their children. I cannot think of anything more damaging to one's mental health to be a woman renting a house or a flat with two children and terrified because she can't pay her rent, that at any minute she is going to be evicted. That is criminal. Absolutely criminal.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : Jenni, what would you say to someone, a landlord who was renting out one property and that rent was enabling them to stay in their own property. What would you say to them?
8:29
Part 52
Words: 164
[JENNI MURRAY] : They chose to be a landlord. They could have some sort of empathy in the current economic climate. They can probably get their mortgage redone. Talk to the building society about it. There are always ways of getting around that kind of thing. But if you're a very poor woman with children, living alone, with no resources, and no knowledge of how to argue these things and where to find help, it's just criminal. It really is.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : Andrea.
 
[AUDIENCE MEMBER] : Thanks, Fiona. Again, I'm really empathising with with what Jenni is saying. I've been in that position. I've been in a position where myself and my daughter were effectively homeless and it is a really horrible place to be. I was fortunate enough that I could get in a car and go live with my parents for a year or two. But being in that situation is like nothing that I would wish on my worst enemy.
8:30
Part 53
Words: 151
[AUDIENCE MEMBER] : I would be interested to know how many people on the Panel and how many people on various advisory boards that made the decision about stopping the eviction have actually been in danger of losing the roof over their head.
 
[FIONA BRUCE] : How many of us have been in danger of losing the roof over their head? Not me. So, Lucy, what do you say to someone like Andrea?
 
[LUCY FRAZER] : Obviously it must have been very, very difficult on you and it must have had an impact on your life. I feel for you in that situation. But the audience have highlighted a number of issues which the government are addressing. It is not just about the rental properties, it is also, as I think Peter brought up, about rough sleeping. The government have done a significant job of getting rough sleepers off the streets in the --
8:31
Part 54
Words: 83
[PETER KYLE] : They are going on the streets.
 
[LUCY FRAZER] : In addition to that it is about building a sustainable housing market. That is fundamental. We have a planning bill that is coming to The House which will encourage and ensure that we have sufficient housing stock so that people can buy affordable homes. Because, yes, it is important that people can rent but it is also important if people want to buy there are houses available to them to buy.
8:31
Part 55
Words: 59
[LUCY FRAZER] : In my constituency I went to visit a community land trust, which is a fantastic idea where the community has a proportion of land in a development which the community owns and is affordable housing for people who live and work locally. So the government has a variety of measures to tackle what is a very, very difficult problem.